Moo has simple rules but is surprisingly challenging. The computer "randomly" (pseudo-random actually) selects a 4-digit number (repeats are allowed), and you take turns typing in guesses. The goal is to guess the number in as few turns as possible. After each guess, you receive clues. The clues are three values: the number of completely wrong digits (sheep), the number of digits correct but in the wrong position (cows), and the number of digits correct and also in the correct position (bulls). Different variants of moo compute these three values in different ways (and may use different animal names). To be a great moo player, it is important to understand exactly how these values are computed. It can become especially confusing when duplicate digits are allowed in the solution and guesses.

In the included demo program duplicates are allowed. Each of the four guessed digits are considered independently of the others, and each is assigned to one of the three categories. Thus, the sum of the categories is always four. This independence is especially important to remember for duplicates. For example, suppose the solution is 0622, and the guess is 2222. The result will be 0 sheep, 2 cows, and 2 bulls. Intuitively, it seems like there should be some sheep! The logic is as follows. For the first digit, the program notes that the first digit in the solution is not a 2, so this is not a bull. However, the 2 appears elsewhere, so it's a cow. The same logic applies to the second digit. For the last two digits, they match the digit in the same position in the solution, so they are bulls. So while initially confusing, this algorithm is quite simple. Using such a simple calculation makes the game more enjoyable. Once you understand it, you can work on putting the clues together using logic without having to also puzzle over how the computer came up with the values.

In the demo program, these values are displayed as a vertical bar to the right of each guess, always four pixels high. Bulls are on the bottom in red, cows in the middle in pink, and sheep at the top in gray. The goal, of course, is to turn this bar completely red.

TIP: There is a reason why the program was designed to keep old guesses and results on the screen. The best moo players put clues together across all of their previous guesses!
